#20: Added requirements and design (#136)
exasol/project-keeper-maven-plugin: doc/design.md

# Design

## Validators

`dsn~validators~1`

> As an interface for the different validations we created the `Validator` interface. It only contains the `validate` method:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As an interface for the different validations, we created the `Validator` interface. It only contains the `validate` method:
```

```java
public List<ValidationFinding> validate();
```

The `ValidationFinding` consists of:

* A message

> * Optionally: A fix for the finding (function closure that changes the project so that the finding will not happen again)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* An optional fix for the violation finding
```

A fix is a function closure that changes the project so that the fixed finding does not happen again.

Author: ```suggestion
* Optionally: A fix for the finding (function closure that changes the project so that the finding will not happen again)

A fix is a function closure that changes the project so that the fixed finding does not happen again.
```

> We decided for this interface since it allows us to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided on this interface since it allows us to:
```

* Report errors that can't be fixed automatically

> * Report error and directly provide a fix for it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Report an error and directly provide a fix for it
```

> A problem with this approach is that some validation-fixes change a resource (typically files). If a validator creates multiple validation findings for the same resource, each fix needs to read and write the file. Consider for example the plugin validator for the pom file. If the pom file validator detects multiple missing plugins, each of the fixes would need to write the file. Since the fixes are executed by the surrounding code and not in a specific order. To solve this used the trick to create a compound finding. So basically one finding with one error message that combines the one of all it's sub findings. Its fix is a method that runs the fixes of all sub-findings and then writes the pom file.

Author: > Is this really a problem? Is reading and writing the file such a large overhead? Or, is it about the case, where you can fix the file in the whole, by for example regenerating it completely, but you can fix the single findings itself?

Well, there is a problem. I don't directly modify the pom file but a XML model. The fix closures contain modifications on this model. They don't revalidate the file. So if want to apply all fixes to the in memory XML model and then write it back to disk.

> A problem with this approach is that some validation-fixes change a resource (typically files). If a validator creates multiple validation findings for the same resource, each fix needs to read and write the file. Consider for example the plugin validator for the pom file. If the pom file validator detects multiple missing plugins, each of the fixes would need to write the file. Since the fixes are executed by the surrounding code and not in a specific order. To solve this, we used the trick to create a compound finding. So basically one finding with one error message that combines the one of all it's sub findings. Its fix is a method that runs the fixes of all sub-findings and then writes the pom file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A problem with this approach is that some validation fixes change a resource such as files. If a validator creates multiple validation findings for the same resource, each fix needs to read and write the file. 

Consider, for example, the plugin validator for the pom file. If the pom file validator detects multiple missing plugins, each of these fixes would need to write the file since the fixes are executed by the surrounding code and not in a specific order. To solve this, we used the trick to create a compound finding. So basically one finding with one error message that combines one of all its sub findings. Its fix is a method that runs the fixes of all sub-findings and then writes the pom file.
```

Covers:

> * feat~fix-findings~1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `feat~fix-findings~1`
```

Needs: impl

### Required Files Validator

`dsn~required-files-validator~1`

> We decided to add the template for the required files by a file structure in the resources of this project. There are two folders: `require_exist` and `require_exact`. For files in the `require_exist` folder, PK only checks if they exist in the project. If they don't exist it creates the file with the content from the file in `require_exist` as a template.

Author: I did not have a better idea yet ;-) One important criteria for me is that PK works offline. So it doesn't fetch the template from a server each time.
I also liked that you update a project's template by updating project keeper. In general, I am not sure if it's possible to separate project keeper from the templates. (project-keeper is the template) For example for validating the dependencies .md file code is needed. Doing it via configuration is simply not possible.

> We decided to add the template for the required files by a file structure in the resources of this project. There are two folders: `require_exist` and `require_exact`. For files in the `require_exist` folder, PK only checks if they exist in the project. If they don't exist it creates the file with the content from the file in `require_exist` as a template.

Reviewer 2: I think the dependencies.md validator could be its own project and the config only says, I need it, please download it and apply it to the project.

> We decided to add the template for the required files by a file structure in the resources of this project. There are two folders: `require_exist` and `require_exact`. For files in the `require_exist` folder, PK only checks if they exist in the project. If they don't exist it creates the file with the content from the file in `require_exist` as a template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to add the template for the required files by a file structure in the resources of this project. There are two folders: `require_exist` and `require_exact`. 

For files in the `require_exist` folder, PK only checks if they exist in the project. If they don't exist it creates the file with the content from the file in `require_exist` as a template.
```

> For the files in the `require_exact` PK also validates that the content is exactly the same.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the files in the `require_exact` folder, PK also validates that the content is exactly the same.
```

> Rationale:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Rationale:

```

> This way of defining the project structure makes it very convenient to add new content. Now knowledge about the internal implementation of this plugin is required. That allows users to quickly add or modify the template.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This way of defining the project structure makes it very convenient to add new content. No knowledge about the internal implementation of this plugin is required. That allows users to quickly add or modify the template.
```

> An alternative would be to define the files by Java classes. In order to contain the contents of the required files, these classes would contain many String concatenations which would be very unreadable.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative would be to define the files by Java classes. In order to contain the contents of the required files, these classes would contain many string concatenations which would be very unreadable.
```

Covers:

* `req~verify-that-files-exist~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

### Deleted Files Validator

`dsn~deleted-files-validator~1`

> For configuring the deleted files validator we decided for a Java API. For each deleted file one can specify a reason that will be printed as error message. By that one can for example tell that the file was moved.

Reviewer 2: Not sure, if this is really a good idea? Might be different for languages and maybe also for a single repository.

> For configuring the deleted files validator we decided for a Java API. For each deleted file one can specify a reason that will be printed as error message. By that one can for example tell that the file was moved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For configuring the deleted files validator we decided for a Java API. For each deleted file PK specifies a reason that will be printed as an error message. By that users can for example tell that the file was moved.
```

> For configuring the deleted files validator we decided for a Java API. For each deleted file one can specify a reason that will be printed as error message. By that one can for example tell that the file was moved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For configuring the deleted files validator we decided on a Java API. For each deleted file one can specify a reason that will be printed as an error message. By that one can for example tell that the file was moved.
```

Author: ```suggestion
For configuring the deleted files validator we decided on a Java API. For each deleted file PK developers must specify a reason that will be printed as error message. By that PK can for example tell that the file was moved.
```

Covers:

* `req~verify-non-existence-of-files~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

### Maven Plugin Validator

`dsn~mvn-plugin-validator~1`

> We decided to implement the verification of the pom plugins using a combination of xml files and Java code. The XML files (in resources/mvn_templates) contain the XML of a typical plugin definition. The Java class defines which XML properties must be like define in the template.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to implement the verification of the pom plugins using a combination of XML files and Java code. The XML files (located in `resources/mvn_templates` directory) contain the XML of a typical plugin definition. The Java class defines which XML properties must be like define in the template.
```

Reviewer: This is not  very clear: The Java class defines which XML properties must be like define in the template.

Did you mean, `The Java class verifies that XML properties defined in the pom file are same as the ones in the template.` ?

Author: ```suggestion
We decided to implement the verification of the pom plugins using a combination of XML files and Java code. The XML files (located in `resources/mvn_templates` directory) contain the XML of a typical plugin definition. The Java class defines for which XML properties PK verifies that they are same as the ones in the template.
```

Reviewer: Looks good!

> This approach allows us to quickly add new templates by copying an exemplary plugin definition from a pom.xml file, and the defining which parts are mandatory using Java.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This approach allows us to quickly add new templates by copying an exemplary plugin definition from a pom.xml file, and defining which parts are mandatory using Java.
```

Covers:

* `req~verify-mvn-plugins~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

### Mvn Dependency Validator

`dsn~mvn-dependency-validator~1`

> We implemented the validation for dependency declaration using Java code. That allows us to add specific validations for certain dependencies. For example for the jacoco dependency we need to validate the scope.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We implemented the validation for dependency declaration using Java code. That allows us to add specific validations for certain dependencies. For example, for the Jacoco dependency, we need to validate the scope.
```

However, implementing it purely via configuration would probably also be a good solution. In the future maybe even a better one, depending on how many dependencies should get validated.

Covers:

* `req~verify-maven-dependencies~1`

Needs: impl, utest, itest

### Dependency Changes Section in changes_x.x.x.md File Validator

`dsn~dependency-section-in-changes_x.x.x.md-file-validator~1`

The basic approach for this validator is to generate the markdown for the `Dependency Changes` section and then compare the content of the project's file with that generated content. In case they differ the validation fails. The automatic fix of the validation error is to override the section with the generated one.

> For this feature we need to generate the list of dependency changes since the last release. We decided to generate this list by comparing the dependencies of the last release with the dependencies of this release.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this feature we need to generate the list of dependency changes since the last release. We decided to generate this list by comparing the dependencies of the last release with the dependencies of the current release.
```

> For both versions we [read the project's dependencies](#reading-project-dependencies) and create a java model that we then compare to extract the diffs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For both versions we [read the project's dependencies](#reading-project-dependencies) and create a Java model that we then compare to extract the differences.
```

> For getting the last release we use git. We detect the previous release by walking through the commits on the current branch in reverse order. If we find a tag that looks like a version number we extract the pom.xml file from this commit and analyze its dependencies.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For getting the last release we use Git. We detect the previous release by walking through the commits on the current branch in reverse order. If we find a tag that looks like a version number we extract the `pom.xml` file from this commit and analyze its dependencies.
```

> We separated the crawling of the dependencies from the rendering of the table, so that we can add different crawlers for other languages or build systems in the future.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

> We separated the crawling of the dependencies from the rendering of the table, so that we can add different crawlers for other languages or build systems in the future.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We separated the crawling of the dependencies from the rendering of the table so that we can add different crawlers for other languages or build systems in the future.
```

Needs: impl, utest, itest

Covers:

* `req~verify-dependency-section-in-changes_x.x.x.md-file~1`

### Dependencies.md File Validator

`dsn~depnedency.md-file-validator~1`

For validating the `dependencies.md` file we first generate the expected content and then compare the actual file with the expected content.

> For generating the content we first [read the project's dependencies](#reading-project-dependencies) and then use the maven API to get the project information. To do so, we again use the maven `ProjectBuilder`. This maven class can fetch the dependency from the maven repository (local or remote) and provide a java representation of the pom file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For generating the content we first [read the project's dependencies](#reading-project-dependencies) and then use the maven API to get the project information. To do so, we again use the maven `ProjectBuilder`. This maven class can fetch a dependency from the maven repository (local or remote) and provide a Java representation of the pom file.
```

> We separated the crawling of the dependency information from the rendering of the files so that we can add support for different languages or build systems in the future.

Reviewer 2: :+1:

Covers:

* `req~verify-dependencies-file~1`

Needs: impl, itest

### Reading Project Dependencies

`dsn~reading-project-dependencies~1`

> For reading the project's dependencies we decided to use the maven `ProjectBuilder`. Maven injects this object to the main class of this maven plugin. In contrast to simply instantiating it, this approach introduces coupling and makes unit tests impossible. For that reason in the future we might want to move the dependency discovery into a dedicated maven plugin and call it via exec.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For reading the project's dependencies we decided to use the maven `ProjectBuilder`. Maven injects this object into the main class of PK maven plugin. In contrast to simply instantiating it, this approach introduces coupling and makes unit tests impossible. For that reason in the future, we might want to move the dependency discovery into a dedicated maven plugin and call it via `mvn exec` command.
```

Unit testing is not possible since `ProjectBuilder` needs to be injected by maven.

Needs: impl, itest

## Maven Integration

### Maven Verify Goal

`dsn~mvn-verify-goal~1`

This plugin defines a maven goal named `verify` that checks if the project matches the defined structure. The default maven lifecycle phase for this goal is the `package` phase.

Covers:

* `feat~mvn-integration~1`

Needs: impl, itest

### Maven fix Gaol

`dsn~mvn-fix-goal~1`

This plugin defines a maven goal named `fix` that creates or updates the project files so that they match the required project structure.

Covers:

* `feat~mvn-integration~1`

Needs: impl, itest

## Configuration

### Modules

`dsn~modules~1`

> We decided to group sets of validations into modules. These modules represent typical use cases. For example one module is `maven_central` which contains the validations for publishing on maven central.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We decided to group sets of validations into modules. These modules represent typical use cases. For example one module is `maven_central` which contains the validations for publishing to Maven Central Artifact Repository.
```

Covers:

* `feat~configuration~1`

Needs: impl, utest

### Excluding Files

`dsn~excluding-files~1`

We added the possibility to exclude files from the validation.

Rationale:

> * Some projects need a non default configuration

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Some projects need a non-default configuration
```

> * Sometimes it's required for trying something out

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* It helps trying something out
```
